<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01 Transitional//EN">
<HTML>
 <HEAD>
   <TITLE> [Lightning-dev] L2s Onchain Support IRC Workshop
   </TITLE>
   <LINK REL="Index" HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2021-April/index.html" >
   <LINK REL="made" HREF="mailto:lightning-dev%40lists.linuxfoundation.org?Subject=Re:%20Re%3A%20%5BLightning-dev%5D%20L2s%20Onchain%20Support%20IRC%20Workshop&In-Reply-To=%3CCAD5xwhjUP%2B%3DTWtJWSjwFLit7finoVOwpF8bMydOxxVeV8M9oOA%40mail.gmail.com%3E">
   <META NAME="robots" CONTENT="index,nofollow">
   <style type="text/css">
       pre {
           white-space: pre-wrap;       /* css-2.1, curent FF, Opera, Safari */
           }
   </style>
   <META http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=us-ascii">
   <LINK REL="Previous"  HREF="003002.html">
   <LINK REL="Next"  HREF="003004.html">
 </HEAD>
 <BODY BGCOLOR="#ffffff">
   <H1>[Lightning-dev] L2s Onchain Support IRC Workshop</H1>
    <B>Jeremy</B> 
    <A HREF="mailto:lightning-dev%40lists.linuxfoundation.org?Subject=Re:%20Re%3A%20%5BLightning-dev%5D%20L2s%20Onchain%20Support%20IRC%20Workshop&In-Reply-To=%3CCAD5xwhjUP%2B%3DTWtJWSjwFLit7finoVOwpF8bMydOxxVeV8M9oOA%40mail.gmail.com%3E"
       TITLE="[Lightning-dev] L2s Onchain Support IRC Workshop">jlrubin at mit.edu
       </A><BR>
    <I>Fri Apr 23 15:25:19 UTC 2021</I>
    <P><UL>
        <LI>Previous message: <A HREF="003002.html">[Lightning-dev] L2s Onchain Support IRC Workshop
</A></li>
        <LI>Next message: <A HREF="003004.html">[Lightning-dev] L2s Onchain Support IRC Workshop
</A></li>
         <LI> <B>Messages sorted by:</B> 
              <a href="date.html#3003">[ date ]</a>
              <a href="thread.html#3003">[ thread ]</a>
              <a href="subject.html#3003">[ subject ]</a>
              <a href="author.html#3003">[ author ]</a>
         </LI>
       </UL>
    <HR>  
<!--beginarticle-->
<PRE>I'd be excited to join. Recommend bumping the date  to mid June, if that's
ok, as many Americans will be at Bitcoin 2021.

I was thinking about reviving the sponsors proposal with a 100 block lock
on spending a sponsoring tx which would hopefully make less controversial,
this would be a great place to discuss those tradeoffs.

On Fri, Apr 23, 2021, 8:17 AM Antoine Riard &lt;<A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">antoine.riard at gmail.com</A>&gt; wrote:

&gt;<i> Hi,
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> During the lastest years, tx-relay and mempool acceptances rules of the
</I>&gt;<i> base layer have been sources of major security and operational concerns for
</I>&gt;<i> Lightning and other Bitcoin second-layers [0]. I think those areas require
</I>&gt;<i> significant improvements to ease design and deployment of higher Bitcoin
</I>&gt;<i> layers and I believe this opinion is shared among the L2 dev community. In
</I>&gt;<i> order to make advancements, it has been discussed a few times in the last
</I>&gt;<i> months to organize in-person workshops to discuss those issues with the
</I>&gt;<i> presence of both L1/L2 devs to make exchange fruitful.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> Unfortunately, I don't think we'll be able to organize such in-person
</I>&gt;<i> workshops this year (because you know travel is hard those days...) As a
</I>&gt;<i> substitution, I'm proposing a series of one or more irc meetings. That
</I>&gt;<i> said, this substitution has the happy benefit to gather far more folks
</I>&gt;<i> interested by those issues that you can fit in a room.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> # Scope
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> I would like to propose the following 4 items as topics of discussion.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> 1) Package relay design or another generic L2 fee-bumping primitive like
</I>&gt;<i> sponsorship [0]. IMHO, this primitive should at least solve mempools spikes
</I>&gt;<i> making obsolete propagation of transactions with pre-signed feerate, solve
</I>&gt;<i> pinning attacks compromising Lightning/multi-party contract protocol
</I>&gt;<i> safety, offer an usable and stable API to L2 software stack, stay
</I>&gt;<i> compatible with miner and full-node operators incentives and obviously
</I>&gt;<i> minimize CPU/memory DoS vectors.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> 2) Deprecation of opt-in RBF toward full-rbf. Opt-in RBF makes it trivial
</I>&gt;<i> for an attacker to partition network mempools in divergent subsets and from
</I>&gt;<i> then launch advanced security or privacy attacks against a Lightning node.
</I>&gt;<i> Note, it might also be a concern for bandwidth bleeding attacks against L1
</I>&gt;<i> nodes.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> 3) Guidelines about coordinated cross-layers security disclosures.
</I>&gt;<i> Mitigating a security issue around tx-relay or the mempool in Core might
</I>&gt;<i> have harmful implications for downstream projects. Ideally, L2 projects
</I>&gt;<i> maintainers should be ready to upgrade their protocols in emergency in
</I>&gt;<i> coordination with base layers developers.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> 4) Guidelines about L2 protocols onchain security design. Currently
</I>&gt;<i> deployed like Lightning are making a bunch of assumptions on tx-relay and
</I>&gt;<i> mempool acceptances rules. Those rules are non-normative, non-reliable and
</I>&gt;<i> lack documentation. Further, they're devoid of tooling to enforce them at
</I>&gt;<i> runtime [2]. IMHO, it could be preferable to identify a subset of them on
</I>&gt;<i> which second-layers protocols can do assumptions without encroaching too
</I>&gt;<i> much on nodes's policy realm or making the base layer development in those
</I>&gt;<i> areas too cumbersome.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> I'm aware that some folks are interested in other topics such as extension
</I>&gt;<i> of Core's mempools package limits or better pricing of RBF replacement. So
</I>&gt;<i> l propose a 2-week concertation period to submit other topics related to
</I>&gt;<i> tx-relay or mempools improvements towards L2s before to propose a finalized
</I>&gt;<i> scope and agenda.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> # Goals
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> 1) Reaching technical consensus.
</I>&gt;<i> 2) Reaching technical consensus, before seeking community consensus as it
</I>&gt;<i> likely has ecosystem-wide implications.
</I>&gt;<i> 3) Establishing a security incident response policy which can be applied
</I>&gt;<i> by dev teams in the future.
</I>&gt;<i> 4) Establishing a philosophy design and associated documentations (BIPs,
</I>&gt;<i> best practices, ...)
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> # Timeline
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> 2021-04-23: Start of concertation period
</I>&gt;<i> 2021-05-07: End of concertation period
</I>&gt;<i> 2021-05-10: Proposition of workshop agenda and schedule
</I>&gt;<i> late 2021-05/2021-06: IRC meetings
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> As the problem space is savagely wide, I've started a collection of
</I>&gt;<i> documents to assist this workshop : <A HREF="https://github.com/ariard/L2-zoology">https://github.com/ariard/L2-zoology</A>
</I>&gt;<i> Still wip, but I'll have them in a good shape at agenda publication, with
</I>&gt;<i> reading suggestions and open questions to structure discussions.
</I>&gt;<i> Also working on transaction pinning and mempool partitions attacks
</I>&gt;<i> simulations.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> If L2s security/p2p/mempool is your jam, feel free to get involved :)
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> Cheers,
</I>&gt;<i> Antoine
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> [0] For e.g see optech section on transaction pinning attacks :
</I>&gt;<i> <A HREF="https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/transaction-pinning/">https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/transaction-pinning/</A>
</I>&gt;<i> [1]
</I>&gt;<i> <A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2020-September/018168.html">https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2020-September/018168.html</A>
</I>&gt;<i> [2] Lack of reference tooling make it easier to have bug slip in like
</I>&gt;<i> <A HREF="../2020-October/002858.html">https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2020-October/002858.html</A>
</I>&gt;<i> _______________________________________________
</I>&gt;<i> Lightning-dev mailing list
</I>&gt;<i> <A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">Lightning-dev at lists.linuxfoundation.org</A>
</I>&gt;<i> <A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev</A>
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: &lt;<A HREF="http://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/attachments/20210423/4e8df87e/attachment.html">http://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/attachments/20210423/4e8df87e/attachment.html</A>&gt;
</PRE>













<!--endarticle-->
    <HR>
    <P><UL>
        <!--threads-->
	<LI>Previous message: <A HREF="003002.html">[Lightning-dev] L2s Onchain Support IRC Workshop
</A></li>
	<LI>Next message: <A HREF="003004.html">[Lightning-dev] L2s Onchain Support IRC Workshop
</A></li>
         <LI> <B>Messages sorted by:</B> 
              <a href="date.html#3003">[ date ]</a>
              <a href="thread.html#3003">[ thread ]</a>
              <a href="subject.html#3003">[ subject ]</a>
              <a href="author.html#3003">[ author ]</a>
         </LI>
       </UL>

<hr>
<a href="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">More information about the Lightning-dev
mailing list</a><br>
</body></html>
