<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01 Transitional//EN">
<HTML>
 <HEAD>
   <TITLE> [Lightning-dev] proposal for Lightning Network improvement	proposals
   </TITLE>
   <LINK REL="Index" HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2018-July/index.html" >
   <LINK REL="made" HREF="mailto:lightning-dev%40lists.linuxfoundation.org?Subject=Re:%20Re%3A%20%5BLightning-dev%5D%20proposal%20for%20Lightning%20Network%20improvement%0A%09proposals&In-Reply-To=%3CCAO3Pvs8m%3Dy8n-8G57KuOR8kScRjL88847tjnfAJGYJCwKAqNPw%40mail.gmail.com%3E">
   <META NAME="robots" CONTENT="index,nofollow">
   <style type="text/css">
       pre {
           white-space: pre-wrap;       /* css-2.1, curent FF, Opera, Safari */
           }
   </style>
   <META http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=us-ascii">
   <LINK REL="Previous"  HREF="001369.html">
   <LINK REL="Next"  HREF="001371.html">
 </HEAD>
 <BODY BGCOLOR="#ffffff">
   <H1>[Lightning-dev] proposal for Lightning Network improvement	proposals</H1>
    <B>Olaoluwa Osuntokun</B> 
    <A HREF="mailto:lightning-dev%40lists.linuxfoundation.org?Subject=Re:%20Re%3A%20%5BLightning-dev%5D%20proposal%20for%20Lightning%20Network%20improvement%0A%09proposals&In-Reply-To=%3CCAO3Pvs8m%3Dy8n-8G57KuOR8kScRjL88847tjnfAJGYJCwKAqNPw%40mail.gmail.com%3E"
       TITLE="[Lightning-dev] proposal for Lightning Network improvement	proposals">laolu32 at gmail.com
       </A><BR>
    <I>Mon Jul 23 19:41:36 UTC 2018</I>
    <P><UL>
        <LI>Previous message: <A HREF="001369.html">[Lightning-dev] proposal for Lightning Network improvement proposals
</A></li>
        <LI>Next message: <A HREF="001371.html">[Lightning-dev] Virtual channels
</A></li>
         <LI> <B>Messages sorted by:</B> 
              <a href="date.html#1370">[ date ]</a>
              <a href="thread.html#1370">[ thread ]</a>
              <a href="subject.html#1370">[ subject ]</a>
              <a href="author.html#1370">[ author ]</a>
         </LI>
       </UL>
    <HR>  
<!--beginarticle-->
<PRE>&gt;<i> My concerns are mainly about assignment of values for types and feature
</I>&gt;<i> bits, and how we can test new features without conflicting with other
</I>&gt;<i> developers.
</I>
There're enough feature bits that one can likely just pick a random high
number, and start to roll out their experiment in the wild. If a collision
_does_ happen, then your new feature/protocol will likely detect the
incompatibility (example invalid message from your PoV), disconnect, and
move on. Local feature bits of course, are much more lax than say, global
feature bits.

&gt;<i> For example, looking at the current BOLT#9, it appears bits 8/9 are the
</I>next
&gt;<i> free bits available for use,
</I>
There's no strict requirement that feature bits be assigned in order.
They've been assigned in this order so far, as there really haven't been
many new additions, or experiments in the wild.

&gt;<i> however, I find that other developers have also opted to use the same
</I>bits:
&gt;<i> <A HREF="https://github.com/rgb-org/spec/blob/master/04-lightning-network.md">https://github.com/rgb-org/spec/blob/master/04-lightning-network.md</A>
</I>
A simple courtesy to other developers would simply be to announce on the
list that one is running an experiment with a new feature bit (bit 1493 or
w/e) such that collisions in the wild are less likely. The authors of &quot;RGB&quot;
to my knowledge have never posted on the list to &quot;claim&quot; their experimental
feature bit. Also looking at the spec, their LN integration is more or less
a hand wave over the actual implementations details, so really just a high
level design sketch.

-- Laolu


On Mon, Jul 23, 2018 at 12:15 PM Mr Hodlen &lt;<A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">hodlen at outlook.com</A>&gt; wrote:

&gt;<i> Hi, new guy here. I've also been a bit confused about the process from
</I>&gt;<i> just
</I>&gt;<i> reading the BOLTs.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> I'm working on an implementation of the BOLTs with the intention of
</I>&gt;<i> experimenting with new features.
</I>&gt;<i> My concerns are mainly about assignment of values for types and feature
</I>&gt;<i> bits,
</I>&gt;<i> and how we can test new features without conflicting with other
</I>&gt;<i> developers.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> For example, looking at the current BOLT#9, it appears bits 8/9 are the
</I>&gt;<i> next
</I>&gt;<i> free bits available for use, so if I were implementing a new optional
</I>&gt;<i> feature,
</I>&gt;<i> I would pick the next available bits,
</I>&gt;<i> however, I find that other developers have also opted to use the same
</I>&gt;<i> bits:
</I>&gt;<i> <A HREF="https://github.com/rgb-org/spec/blob/master/04-lightning-network.md">https://github.com/rgb-org/spec/blob/master/04-lightning-network.md</A>
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> I think issue of requiring centralized number assignment can be easily
</I>&gt;<i> avoided
</I>&gt;<i> for experimental features by using a unique identifier for the feature
</I>&gt;<i> instead,
</I>&gt;<i> such as a hash of the feature name.
</I>&gt;<i> This should make it simpler for independent developers to try new features
</I>&gt;<i> before creating new pull requests for a BOLT assignment.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> Here's an extremely rough draft of the idea. The intent is that once an
</I>&gt;<i> experiment has been tested and is succesful, it can move towards being
</I>&gt;<i> standardized as a BOLT. Is it worth adding something like this?
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> --- BOLT #(-1): Experimental Features  [tentatively named]
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> Overview
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> The experimental features protocol is intended for testing protocol
</I>&gt;<i> features
</I>&gt;<i> which are not necessarily intended to become standard BOLTs.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> * Lightning base protocol messages:
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> ** experiment
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> A message for arbitrary protocol implementaion with a unique ID for each
</I>&gt;<i> feature supported.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i>   type: &lt;??&gt;
</I>&gt;<i>   data:
</I>&gt;<i>     [32: experiment_name_hash]
</I>&gt;<i>     [2: payloadlen]
</I>&gt;<i>     [payloadlen: payload]
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> `experiment_name_hash` is be a SHA256 of the feature name, in ASCII,
</I>&gt;<i> concatenated with a good source of randomness to avoid any conflict if any
</I>&gt;<i> two
</I>&gt;<i> developers chose the same name.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> `payloadlen` is the length of the remaining message, which MUST equal the
</I>&gt;<i> length of the outer message -34 bytes.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> `payload` is the payload of the experiment message, which should have the
</I>&gt;<i> same
</I>&gt;<i> format as a regular Lightning message described in BOLT #1.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> A sending node:
</I>&gt;<i>     - MUST send the `init_experiments` message with `experiment_name_hash`
</I>&gt;<i> set
</I>&gt;<i> to 0 before any other `experiment` message is sent.
</I>&gt;<i>     - MUST NOT send an experiment message with any non-zero
</I>&gt;<i> `experiment_name_hash` if the receiver has not already declared support
</I>&gt;<i> for
</I>&gt;<i> the feature_hash.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> A receiving node:
</I>&gt;<i>     - If experiment_name_hash is zero:
</I>&gt;<i>         - Treat the payload as the same format of lightning message, ie, a
</I>&gt;<i> 16-
</I>&gt;<i> bit big endian experiment_type followed by the data.
</I>&gt;<i>     - If the experiment_name_hash is not recognized or disabled, MUST
</I>&gt;<i> ignore
</I>&gt;<i> the message. (SHOULD also fail the channels?)
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> Rationale:
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> The base lightning layer allows extension through feature bits and new odd
</I>&gt;<i> message types, but these require centralized assignment by the Lightning
</I>&gt;<i> community.
</I>&gt;<i> This creates a chicken and egg problem for developers testing experimental
</I>&gt;<i> features: In order to be assigned numbers, we need to standarize our
</I>&gt;<i> feature
</I>&gt;<i> through the BOLT process,
</I>&gt;<i> but we might not wish to attempt standardization until our experimental
</I>&gt;<i> features have been tested.
</I>&gt;<i> Without standardization, different teams working on different experimental
</I>&gt;<i> features may cause conflicts if different clients are treating feature
</I>&gt;<i> bits or
</I>&gt;<i> message types differently.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> By moving all experimental features to a new message where they are
</I>&gt;<i> wrapped in
</I>&gt;<i> a unique feature name, this eradicates chance of conflicting
</I>&gt;<i> implementations.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> Additionally, this message can serve as a generic transport mechanism
</I>&gt;<i> between
</I>&gt;<i> any two lightning nodes who have agreed to support the
</I>&gt;<i> expierment_name_hash,
</I>&gt;<i> as there is no restriction on the format of the payload. This may make it
</I>&gt;<i> possible to serve e.g: HTTP over Lightning.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> * General experiment messages:
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> If `experiment_name_hash` in the experiment message is 0, treat its
</I>&gt;<i> payload as
</I>&gt;<i> on of the following messages:
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> ** init_experiments message
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> Informs a peer of features supported by the client.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i>   1. experiment_type: 16
</I>&gt;<i>   2. data:
</I>&gt;<i>       * [2: eflen]
</I>&gt;<i>       * [eflen*32: experiment_name_hashes]
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> A sending node:
</I>&gt;<i>    * MUST send the `init_experiments` message before any other
</I>&gt;<i> `experiment`
</I>&gt;<i> message for each connection.
</I>&gt;<i>    * SHOULD send the `experiment_name_hash` for any features supported and
</I>&gt;<i> set
</I>&gt;<i> to enabled in their software client.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> A receiving node:
</I>&gt;<i>    * For each experiment_name_hash:
</I>&gt;<i>       * If the hash is unknown or 0: Ignore the feature
</I>&gt;<i>       * If the hash is known: SHOULD enable the feature for communication
</I>&gt;<i> with
</I>&gt;<i> this peer.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> ** experiment_error message
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i>  experiment_type: 17
</I>&gt;<i>  data:
</I>&gt;<i>     [32: channel_id]
</I>&gt;<i>     [32: experiment_name_hash]
</I>&gt;<i>     [2: len]
</I>&gt;<i>     [len: data]
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> For all messages before funding_created: Must use temporary_channel_id in
</I>&gt;<i> lieu
</I>&gt;<i> of channel_id.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> A sending node:
</I>&gt;<i>    * If error is critical, should also send the regular lightning `error`
</I>&gt;<i> message from BOLT #1
</I>&gt;<i>    * If the error is not specific to any channel: set channel_id to 0.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> A receiving node
</I>&gt;<i>    * If experiment_name_hash is unknown:
</I>&gt;<i>       - MUST fail the channel.
</I>&gt;<i>    * If channel_id is 0
</I>&gt;<i>       - MUST fail all the channels
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> Rationale
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> This message is not intended to replace `error` for criticial errors, but
</I>&gt;<i> is
</I>&gt;<i> provided for additional debugging information
</I>&gt;<i> related to the experimental feature being used.
</I>&gt;<i> A client may decide whether or not it can recover from such errors
</I>&gt;<i> individually per experimental feature, which may include aborting channels
</I>&gt;<i> and
</I>&gt;<i> the connection.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> TODO: Define gossip/query messages related to nodes/channels which support
</I>&gt;<i> features by experiment_hash_name.
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> ---EOF
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> On Sunday, 22 July 2018 13:32:02 BST Olaoluwa Osuntokun wrote:
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; No need to apologize! Perhaps this confusion shows that the current
</I>&gt;<i> process
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; surrounding creating/modifying/drafting BOLT documents does indeed need
</I>&gt;<i> to
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; be better documented. We've more or less been rolling along with a pretty
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; minimal process among the various implementations which I'd say has
</I>&gt;<i> worked
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; pretty well so far. However as more contributors get involved we may need
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; to add a bit more structure to ensure things are transparent for
</I>&gt;<i> newcomers.
</I>&gt;<i> &gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; On Sun, Jul 22, 2018, 12:57 PM Ren&#233; Pickhardt &lt;
</I>&gt;<i> <A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">r.pickhardt at googlemail.com</A>&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; wrote:
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; Sorry did not realized that BOLTs are the equivalent - and aparently
</I>&gt;<i> many
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; people I spoke to also didn't realize that.
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; I thought BOLT is the protocol specification and the bolts are just the
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; sections. And the BOLT should be updated to a new version.
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; Also I suggested that this should take place for example within the
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; lightning rfc repo. So my suggestion was not about creating another
</I>&gt;<i> place
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; but more about making the process more transparent or kind of filling
</I>&gt;<i> the
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; gap that I felt was there.
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; I am sorry for spaming mailboxes with my suggestion just because I
</I>&gt;<i> didn't
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; understand the current process.
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; Olaoluwa Osuntokun &lt;<A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">laolu32 at gmail.com</A>&gt; schrieb am So., 22. Juli 2018
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; 20:59:
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; We already have the equiv of improvement proposals: BOLTs.
</I>&gt;<i> Historically
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; new standardization documents are proposed initially as issues or PR's
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; when
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; ultimately accepted. Why do we need another repo?
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; On Sun, Jul 22, 2018, 6:45 AM Ren&#233; Pickhardt via Lightning-dev &lt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; <A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">lightning-dev at lists.linuxfoundation.org</A>&gt; wrote:
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; Hey everyone,
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; in the grand tradition of BIPs I propose that we also start to have
</I>&gt;<i> our
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; own LIPs (Lightning Network Improvement proposals)
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; I think they should be placed on the github.com/lightning account
</I>&gt;<i> in a
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; repo called lips (or within the lightning rfc repo) until that will
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; happen
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; I created a draft for LIP-0001 (which is describing the process and
</I>&gt;<i> is
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; 95%
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; influenced by BIP-0002) in my github repo:
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; <A HREF="https://github.com/renepickhardt/lips">https://github.com/renepickhardt/lips</A>  (There are some open Todos
</I>&gt;<i> and
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; Questions in this LIP)
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; The background for this Idea: I just came home from the bitcoin
</I>&gt;<i> munich
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; meetup where I held a talk examining BOLT. As I was asked to also
</I>&gt;<i> talk
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; about the future plans of the developers for BOLT 1.1 I realized
</I>&gt;<i> while
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; preparing the talk that many ideas are distributed within the
</I>&gt;<i> community
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; but
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; it seems we don't have a central place where we collect future
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; enhancements
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; for BOLT1.1. Having this in mind I think also for the meeting in
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; Australia
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; it would be nice if already a list of LIPs would be in place so that
</I>&gt;<i> the
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; discussion can be more focused.
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; potential LIPs could include:
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; * Watchtowers
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; * Autopilot
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; * AMP
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; * Splicing
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; * Routing Protcols
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; * Broadcasting past Routing statistics
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; * eltoo
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; * ...
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; As said before I would volunteer to work on a LIP for Splicing
</I>&gt;<i> (actually
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; I already started)
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; best Rene
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; --
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; <A HREF="https://www.rene-pickhardt.de">https://www.rene-pickhardt.de</A>
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; Skype: rene.pickhardt
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; mobile: +49 (0)176 5762 3618 &lt;+49%20176%2057623618&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; _______________________________________________
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; Lightning-dev mailing list
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; <A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">Lightning-dev at lists.linuxfoundation.org</A>
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;&gt; <A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev</A>
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; Am 22.07.2018 20:59 schrieb &quot;Olaoluwa Osuntokun&quot; &lt;<A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">laolu32 at gmail.com</A>&gt;:
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; We already have the equiv of improvement proposals: BOLTs. Historically
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; new standardization documents are proposed initially as issues or PR's
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; when
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; ultimately accepted. Why do we need another repo?
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; On Sun, Jul 22, 2018, 6:45 AM Ren&#233; Pickhardt via Lightning-dev &lt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt; <A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">lightning-dev at lists.linuxfoundation.org</A>&gt; wrote:
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; Hey everyone,
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; in the grand tradition of BIPs I propose that we also start to have
</I>&gt;<i> our
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; own LIPs (Lightning Network Improvement proposals)
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; I think they should be placed on the github.com/lightning account in
</I>&gt;<i> a
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; repo called lips (or within the lightning rfc repo) until that will
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; happen
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; I created a draft for LIP-0001 (which is describing the process and is
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; 95%
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; influenced by BIP-0002) in my github repo:
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; <A HREF="https://github.com/renepickhardt/lips">https://github.com/renepickhardt/lips</A>  (There are some open Todos and
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; Questions in this LIP)
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; The background for this Idea: I just came home from the bitcoin munich
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; meetup where I held a talk examining BOLT. As I was asked to also talk
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; about the future plans of the developers for BOLT 1.1 I realized while
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; preparing the talk that many ideas are distributed within the
</I>&gt;<i> community
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; but
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; it seems we don't have a central place where we collect future
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; enhancements
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; for BOLT1.1. Having this in mind I think also for the meeting in
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; Australia
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; it would be nice if already a list of LIPs would be in place so that
</I>&gt;<i> the
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; discussion can be more focused.
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; potential LIPs could include:
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; * Watchtowers
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; * Autopilot
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; * AMP
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; * Splicing
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; * Routing Protcols
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; * Broadcasting past Routing statistics
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; * eltoo
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; * ...
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; As said before I would volunteer to work on a LIP for Splicing
</I>&gt;<i> (actually
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; I already started)
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; best Rene
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; --
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; <A HREF="https://www.rene-pickhardt.de">https://www.rene-pickhardt.de</A>
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; Skype: rene.pickhardt
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; mobile: +49 (0)176 5762 3618 &lt;+49%20176%2057623618&gt;
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; _______________________________________________
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; Lightning-dev mailing list
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; <A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">Lightning-dev at lists.linuxfoundation.org</A>
</I>&gt;<i> &gt; &gt;&gt; <A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev</A>
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>&gt;<i> _______________________________________________
</I>&gt;<i> Lightning-dev mailing list
</I>&gt;<i> <A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">Lightning-dev at lists.linuxfoundation.org</A>
</I>&gt;<i> <A HREF="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev</A>
</I>&gt;<i>
</I>-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: &lt;<A HREF="http://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/attachments/20180723/9524b234/attachment-0001.html">http://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/attachments/20180723/9524b234/attachment-0001.html</A>&gt;
</PRE>


<!--endarticle-->
    <HR>
    <P><UL>
        <!--threads-->
	<LI>Previous message: <A HREF="001369.html">[Lightning-dev] proposal for Lightning Network improvement proposals
</A></li>
	<LI>Next message: <A HREF="001371.html">[Lightning-dev] Virtual channels
</A></li>
         <LI> <B>Messages sorted by:</B> 
              <a href="date.html#1370">[ date ]</a>
              <a href="thread.html#1370">[ thread ]</a>
              <a href="subject.html#1370">[ subject ]</a>
              <a href="author.html#1370">[ author ]</a>
         </LI>
       </UL>

<hr>
<a href="https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev">More information about the Lightning-dev
mailing list</a><br>
</body></html>
